


 
   Le grand Meaulnes 
 by Alain-Fournier 
 Aligned by: Unknown (fully reviewed) 
 
 
  Translation: Françoise Delisle
  The Wanderer
  Alain-Fournier
  First Part
  I
  THE BOARDER
  He arrived at our home on a Sunday of November, 189-.
  
   I still say 'our home,' although the house no longer belongs to us.
   We left that part of the country nearly fifteen years ago and shall certainly never go back to it.
  
  
   We were living in the building of the Higher Elementary Classes at Sainte-Agathe's School.
   My father, whom I used to call M. Seurel as did other pupils, was head of the Middle School and also of the Higher Elementary classes where pupils worked for the preliminary teacher's examination.
   My mother taught the infants.
  
  At the extreme end of the small town, a long red house with five glass doors and a Virginia creeper upon its walls ; an immense courtyard with shelters, a washhouse and a huge gateway, on the side looking towards the village; on the north side, a small gate opening on the road leading to the station three kilometres off; on the south, at the back of the house, fields, gardens, meadows joining the outskirts...such is the simple plan of this dwelling where I spent the most troubled but the most happy days of my life - the house from which we launched our adventures and to which they returned to break themselves like waves on a bare rock.
  
   At the time of some new 'appointments,' a whim of fate, due to some inspector or to the Prefect, had led us there.
   Towards the end of the summer holidays, a long time ago, a peasant cart, preceding our household goods, deposited my mother and myself before the little rusty gate.
   Urchins who were stealing peaches in the garden silently escaped through holes in the hedge . . .
   My mother, whom we used to call Millie and who was the most methodical housekeeper I ever knew, had at once gone into the rooms full of dusty straw, and had declared with much consternation - as was her custom at each 'removal' - that our furniture would never fit in a house so badly built. . .
   She had come out to impart her trouble to me.
   While speaking she had, with her handkerchief, gently wiped my face blackened by the journey.
   Then she had gone back to consider what doors and windows would have to be blocked to make the place habitable ...
   As for me, wearing a big straw hat with streamers, I was left alone on the gravel of that strange playground, waiting for her, prying shyly around the well and under the cart-shed.
  
  
   Thus to-day I picture our arrival.
   For as soon as I wish to bring back the distant memory of that first evening when I waited in out playground at Sainte-Agathe, at once it is another kind of waiting which I recall, at once I see myself again, both hands pressed to the bars of the front gate, anxiously watching for some one who will soon come down the High Street.
   If I try to imagine that first night which I must have spent in my attic, amidst the lumber-rooms on the upper storey, I recall other nights; I am no longer alone in that room; a tall, restless, and friendly shadow moves along its walls and walks to and fro.
   And that quiet countryside - the school, old Father Martin's field, with its three walnut trees, the garden daily invaded on the stroke of four by women paying calls - all this is, in my memory, forever stirred and transformed by the presence of him who upset all our youth and whose sudden flight even did not leave us in peace.
  
  Yet we had already been ten years in that district when Meaulnes arrived.
  
   I was fifteen.
   It was a cold Sunday of November, the first day of autumn to make one think of winter.
   All day Millie had waited for the station omnibus to bring her a hat for the bad weather.
   That morning she missed Mass, and right up to the sermon, from my place in the choir with the other children, I looked anxiously towards the door to see her come to church wearing her new hat.
  
  In the afternoon, I had to go to vespers alone.
  'Anyhow,' she said to comfort me, brushing my little suit with her hand, 'even if it had come, this precious hat, I should have had to spend my Sunday making it up again.'
  
   This is how our winter Sundays were often spent.
   In the early morning Father went off to some misty pond to jack-fish from a boat, and Mother retired till nightfall into her dark bedroom, to remake her simple dresses.
   She shut herself up in that way for fear some lady visitor, as poor as herself and as proud, might surprise her at the job.
   As for me, vespers over, I waited, reading in the cold dining-room, until she opened the door to show me how she was getting on.
  
  
   That Sunday, a little excitement in front of the church kept me out-of-doors after vespers.
   A christening, under the porch, had attracted a crowd of urchins.
   In the square a few villagers had put on their firemen's jackets and piled their arms ; stiff and stamping their feet with cold, they were listening to Boujardon, the corporal, losing himself in theory ...
  
  
   The christening bells stopped suddenly, like festive chimes at a mistaken time and place.
   Boujardon and his men, rifles slung over their shoulders, dragged off the fire engine at a slow trot, and I saw them disappear at the first turning, followed by four silent urchins, crushing under their heavy boots the twigs on the frozen road, down which I dared not follow them.
  
  In the village the only place left alive was the Café Daniel, from which I heard the murmurs of the drinkers' talk rise and fall, and hugging the low wall of the big playground which separated our house from the village, I came, rather anxious at being late, to the small gate.
  It was ajar and I saw at once that something unusual was happening.
  
   In fact, there stood, outside the dining-room door - the nearest of the five glass doors opening on the playground - a grey-headed woman, leaning forward and trying to look through the curtains.
   She was small and wore a black old- fashioned velvet bonnet.
   Her face was thin and refined, but worn with anxiety, and, at sight of her, I do not know what misgiving made me stand still on the first step, in front of the gate.
  
  
   'My goodness, where's he gone!' she was muttering to herself.
   'He was with me a moment ago.
   He must have gone all round the house already.
   Perhaps he's run away ...'
  
  And after each sentence she gave three barely perceptible little taps on the window-pane.
  
   No one came to let in the unknown visitor.
   Without any doubt Millie had received her hat from the station, and, hearing nothing, at the end of the red bedroom, before a bed bestrewed with old ribbons and uncurled feathers, she was stitching, undoing, and remaking her modest headgear.
   In fact, as soon as I came into the dining-room, followed closely by the visitor, Mother appeared, both her hands to her head, holding wires, ribbons, and feathers which were not yet perfectly secured.
  
  She smiled at me, from blue eyes tired with working till dusk, and exclaimed:
  
   'Look!
   I was waiting to show you , . .'
  
  
   But noticing that woman sitting in the big armchair at the other end of the room, she stopped, disconcerted.
   She quickly removed her hat, and during the whole scene that followed, held it against her breast, inside out, like a nest resting in the bend of her right arm.
  
  
   The woman with the old-fashioned bonnet had begun to explain herself.
   She held between her knees an umbrella and a leather handbag, slightly nodding her head the while, and clicking her tongue as do village women when paying a call.
   She had regained full assurance, and when she spoke of her son she even assumed a superior and mysterious manner which puzzled us.
  
  
   They had both driven from La Ferté d'Angillon, fourteen kilometres from Sainte-Agathe.
   Herself a widow - and very rich, as she gave us to understand - she had lost the younger of her two children, a boy called Antoine, who had suddenly died one evening, on returning from school, after bathing with his brother in a dirty pond.
   She had decided to let Augustin, the elder boy, board with us, that he might take the Higher Course.
  
  
   And forthwith she began to praise this boarder whom she was bringing us.
   I could no longer recognise the grey-headed woman whom, only a minute ago, I had seen stooping in front of the door, with the piteous and haggard bearing of a hen who has lost the wildest chick in her brood.
  
  
   What she was relating with admiration about her son was surprising enough; he loved doing things to please her, he had often gone along the river-bank for miles barelegged, to bring her wild ducks' and moor hens' eggs hidden amongst the reeds ...
   He could set nets . . .
   The other night, he had found a pheasant caught in a snare, in the wood ...
  
  I, who hardly dared to enter the house if I had torn my overall, looked at Millie with astonishment.
  
   But Mother was no longer listening.
   She even motioned to the woman to be quiet; and putting down her 'nest' on the table with great care, she got up silently as if to take some one by surprise ...
  
  Above us, indeed, in a box-room where the blackened remains of the last fourteenth of July fireworks were piled up, an unknown step trod confidently to and fro, shaking the ceiling, crossed the huge dark lumber-rooms of the upper storey and passed at last towards the unused assistant masters' rooms, where lime tree leaves were put to dry and apples to ripen.
  'A little while ago,' said Millie in a low voice, 'I heard that noise in the rooms downstairs ; I thought it was you, François, come back ...'
  
   No one answered.
   We stood, the three of us, with beating hearts ; then the attic door which led to the kitchen was heard to open; some one came down, crossed the kitchen, and appeared in the dim entrance of the dining-room.
   8
  
  
   'Why!
   It is you, Augustin!' said the visitor.
  
  
   He was a tall boy of seventeen, or thereabout.
   At first, as night was falling, I saw only his peasant felt hat, pushed to the back of his head, and his black overall tightly belted in the fashion of schoolboys.
   I could see, too, that he was smiling . . .
  
  He saw me, and before any one had had time to demand an explanation:
  'Aren't you coming into the playground?' he asked.
  
   I hesitated for a moment.
   Then, as Millie did not keep me back, I took up my cap and went towards him.
   We left by the kitchen door and went into the yard under the shelter where darkness was already gathering.
   In the dim evening light I watched, as I walked, his sharp-featured face with its straight nose and downy lip.
  
  
   'Look,' said he, 'I found this in your box-rooms.
   You couldn't have looked at these things.'
  
  He was holding in his hand a little wheel of blackened wood; a string of partly burnt squibs was twisted round it; evidently a Catherine wheel from the fireworks display on the fourteenth of July.
  
   'Two of them didn't go off.
   We will set them alight,' said he, in the tone of voice of one who hopes to make better finds later on.
  
  
   He threw his hat to the ground, and I saw that his hair was cropped like a peasant's.
   He showed me two squib lighters with their paper tapers which the flame had singed, before going out.
   He stuck the axle of the wheel into the sand and - to my astonishment, as such things were strictly forbidden me - pulled out of his pocket a box of matches.
   Bending down with care, he lighted the squib.
   Then, taking hold of my hand, he quickly drew me back.
  
  
   A moment, later, as she came out of the door with Meaulnes' mother after having discussed and settled the boarding fees, my mother saw two sheaves of red-and-white stars rising up under the shelter, hissing like bellows.
   For a moment's space she caught a glimpse of me as I stood in this magic light, holding by the hand the tall strange boy and showing no fear . ..
  
  Once again, she dated not say anything.
  And that evening, at dinner, there sat at our table a silent guest who ate with lowered head, paying no attention to the three pairs of eyes fixed upon him.
  II
  AFTER FOUR O'CLOCK
  
   Then I had never loafed about in the streets with the other village boys.
   An affection of the hip from which I had suffered up to this year of 189- had made me nervous and wretched.
   I still see myself chasing the nimble schoolboys in the alleys round our home, hopping wretchedly on one leg . . .
  
  So I was seldom allowed to go out, and I recall that Millie, who was very proud of me, more than once brought me home and boxed my ears for having been caught hopping thus with some village urchins.
  The arrival of Augustin Meaulnes, at the very time of my cure, marked the beginning of a new life.
  
   Before his coming, a dreary evening of loneliness began for me when lessons were over at four.
   Father was in the habit of carrying into the dining-room grate the fire remaining in the classroom stove; and, little by little, the last boys who had lingered behind left the chilled building, thick with clouds of smoke.
   There were still a few games, some galloping races in the playground, then night came; the two pupils who had swept the classroom fetched their hoods and cloaks, and with their baskets under their arms went away quickly, leaving the big gate open ...
  
  Then, as long as there was a ray of light, I stopped in the record-room at the town hall, with its dead flies and posters that flapped in the draught, and I read, sitting on an old weighing-machine, close to a window looking on the garden.
  
   When it was quite dark, and the dogs of the neighbouring farm began to howl and a light was seen at the window of our little kitchen, then I went home.
   Mother had begun to get supper ready.
   I climbed three steps of the attic stairs, sat down without a word and, leaning my head on the cold rails of the bannisters, watched Millie light her fire in this narrow kitchen where the flame of one candle flickered . . .
  
  
   But some one has come who has taken from me these peaceful, childlike delights.
   Some one has blown out the candle which lit up for me the gentle motherly face bent over the evening meal.
   Some one has extinguished the lamp around which, at night, we were a happy family, when Father had fixed the wooden shutters over the glass doors.
   And he was Augustin Meaulnes, whom the other fellows soon called 'Admiral Meaulnes.'
  
  
   As soon as he became a boarder with us, that is, from the early days of December, the school was no longer deserted in the evening after four.
   Every day then, in the classroom, despite the cold from the swinging door and the shouts and clatter of the cleaners with their pails of water, a score of the big boys, both those from the countryside and the village, gathered round Meaulnes.
   Long discussions followed, never-ending arguments, into which I was drawn restlessly but with pleasure.
  
  Meaulnes never said anything, but it was because of him that repeatedly one chatterbox or another, making of himself the centre of the group, and taking in turn each of his noisily approving friends as witness, would relate some long story of poaching, which the others followed with gaping mouths and inward laughter.
  
   Sitting on a desk and swinging his legs, Meaulnes was thoughtful.
   At exciting moments he used also to laugh, but softly, as though he reserved his real laughter for some better story known only to himself.
   Then, as night fell and no more light came from the classroom windows on the throng of boys, Meaulnes used suddenly to get up, and pushing his way through, call out:
  
  
   'Come on!
   Let's go!'
  
  Then all followed him and until pitch dark one could hear them shouting, towards the heights of the village.
  
   It came about now that I went with them.
   With Meaulnes, I went at milking-time to barn doors just outside the village.
   We entered shops, and the weaver, between two clicks of his loom, used to say out of his darkness:
  
  'Ha! the schoolboys.'
  
   Generally, at dinner-time, we were to be found near the Higher Elementary School with Desnoues, the wheelwright, who was also a blacksmith.
   His shop was an old inn with big double-leaf doors, always kept open.
   From the street you could hear the squeak of the forge bellows, and you could sometimes make out, by the glow of the forge fire, in this dark and noisy place, the country folk who had stopped their cart to have a chat, or a schoolboy like us, his back to a door, a silent onlooker.
  
  And it is there that everything began, about eight days before Christmas.
  III
  I HAUNTED A BASKET-MAKER'S SHOP
  
   Rain had fallen all day; it did not stop till evening.
   The day had been deadly tedious.
   No one went out at recreation, and all the time M. Seurel could be heard calling to the form:
  
  'Don't make such a row, boys !'
  After the last recreation of the day or, as we called it, the last 'quarter,' M. Seurel, who for a while had been walking to and fro lost in thought, suddenly stopped, banged vigorously on the table with a ruler to put an end to the confused buzz with which the last hour of a boring day ends, and, in the attentive silence, asked :
  'Who will drive to the station to-morrow with François to fetch Monsieur and Madame Charpentier?'
  
   These were my grandparents ; Grandfather Charpentier with his grey woollen burnous ; an old man, a retired gamekeeper wearing a rabbit fur bonnet which he called his képi. . .
   Little boys knew him well.
   In the morning, to wash himself, he would draw a pail of water and slosh his face in the manner of old troopers, vaguely rubbing his small pointed beard.
   A group of children, hands behind backs, watched him With respectful curiosity . . .
   They also knew Grandma Charpentier, the small peasant woman and her knitted cap - as Millie never failed to bring her, at least once, into the infants' class.
  
  
   Each year, a few days before Christmas, we were in the habit of going to the station to meet the 4.2 train which brought them.
   To come to us they had crossed the length of the 'département', dragging with them baskets full of chestnuts and other Christmas fare rolled up in napkins.
   The moment the two, muffled up, smiling, and rather shy, had crossed the threshold, we shut all doors on them, and a glorious week of happiness began for us all.. .
  
  To drive them from the station I needed a steady fellow with me, one who would not upset us into a ditch, and yet a gay lad, too, because Grandfather Charpentier was pretty free with swear words and Grandma rather talkative.
  In answer to M. Seurel's question a dozen voices called out together:
  
   'Admiral Meaulnes!
   Admiral Meaulnesl'
  
  But M. Seurel pretended not to hear.
  Then they shouted :
  'Fromentin !'
  Others :
  'Jasmin Delouche !'
  
   The youngest, Roy, the boy who rode across the fields on a sow at full gallop, called out in a piercing voice: 'Can I go?
   Can I go?'
  
  Dutremblay and Mouchebœuf rather shyly put up their hands.
  
   I should have liked it to be Meaulnes.
   This little drive, in a donkey cart, would have become a more important event.
   He also longed for it, but remained scornfully silent.
   All the big boys seated themselves, as he did, on the table, the wrong way round, feet on the bench, as we used to do in times of rest or great rejoicing.
   Coffin, his overall rolled up round his belt, was hugging the iron pillar which supported the beam of the classroom and, in his excitement, was beginning to climb it.
  
  But M. Seurel damped every one by saying :
  
   'Good !
   I choose Mouchebœuf.'
  
  And each went back to his seat silently.
  
   At four o'clock, in the big icy playground, hollowed into channels by the rain, I found myself alone with Meaulnes.
   Without speaking, we both stood looking at the shining village drying under the high wind.
   Soon little Coffin, wrapped in his hooded cloak and holding a piece of bread in his hand, came out of his home; walking close to the walls and whistling, he went straight for the door of the wheelwright.
   Meaulnes opened the big gate, hailed the boy, and a moment later the three of us were settled at the back of the hot red shop, across which icy gusts of wind swept.
   Coffin and I sat close to the forge fire, our muddy feet amongst the white shavings ; Meaulnes, hands in pockets and silent, leaned against the leaf of the door.
   From time to time a village woman, stooping to brave the wind, passed by in the street on her return from the butcher, and we looked up to see who she was.
  
  
   No one spoke.
   The blacksmith and his assistant - one blowing the bellows, the other beating the hot iron - threw big sharp shadows upon the wall...
   I recall that evening as one of the great evenings of my youth.
   I felt both pleasure and anxiety; I was afraid my companion would deprive me of the small happiness of driving to the station, yet, without daring to own it to myself, I expected some extraordinary scheme from him which would upset everything.
  
  
   From time to time the peaceful and regular work of the forge momentarily paused.
   The smith let his hammer fall onto the anvil in a series of clear, strong blows.
   He held the piece of iron on which he had been working close to his leather apron and looked at it.
   Then, raising his head, he said to us, by way of taking an easy breath:
  
  
   'Well, my lads !
   How goes it?'
  
  His man kept his right hand high up on the chain of the bellows, put his left hand on his hip, looked at us with a smile.
  Then the din of hard work began again.
  During one of these pauses, we caught sight of Millie through the swinging door, as she passed in the high wind, closely wrapped in her shawl and laden with small parcels.
  The blacksmith asked :
  'I suppose Monsieur Charpentier will be coming soon?'
  
   'To-morrow, with Grandmother,' said I.
   'I am going to meet the 4:02 train.'
  
  'In Fromentin's cart, eh!'
  I replied at once:
  'No, in Father Martin's.'
  'Ah! then you won't be back in a hurry!'
  Both he and his man began to laugh.
  
   His man, to say something, remarked slowly: 'With Fromentin's mare you could have fetched them from Vierzon.
   There's an hour's wait there.
   It is fifteen kilometres from here.
   You could have got there and back afore Martin's donkey's harnessed.'
  
  'Ah!' said the other, 'that mare has got some go in her, and surely Fromentin would gladly lend her.'
  
   The conversation ended there.
   The forge, once again, became the place of sparks and din where each had his own thoughts.
  
  
   But when the time had come to leave and I got up to attract Meaulnes' attention, he did not notice me at first.
   Leaning against the door, his head bent down in deep thought, he seemed absorbed in what had just been said.
   Seeing him thus lost in thought, looking as though across leagues of fog at these quiet folk at their work, I was reminded suddenly of that picture in 'Robinson Crusoe,' where the young Englishman is seen on the eve of his great adventure 'haunting the shop of a basket-maker'. . .
  
  And I have often thought of it since.
  IV
  THE ESCAPE
  
   At two o'clock in the afternoon next day, in the centre of the freezing country, the form-room stands out clear as a ship on the ocean.
   There is no smell of brine or tar as on a boat, but of herrings fried on the stove and of the scorched woollens of the boys who, on coming back, got too close to the fire.
  
  
   As the end of the year is drawing near, the exercise books for term examination have been given out.
   And while M. Seurel is setting problems on the board silence prevails, only disturbed by whispered conversations, or broken into by stifled exclamations and with sentences of which the first words alone are uttered to frighten one's neighbour:
  
  
   'Sir!
   So and So is . . .'
  
  
   M. Seurel, writing out the problems, is thinking of something else.
   From time to time he turns round and looks at us in a stern but vacant way.
   And this covert disturbance stops entirely for a moment, to begin again immediately, softly at first like a purr.
  
  
   I alone keep quiet in the midst of this turmoil.
   I am sitting at the extreme end of one of the tables on the juniors' side and close to the high windows, and I need only raise myself a little to get a view of the garden, the stream at the lower end of it, and then the fields.
  
  
   From time to time I stand on tiptoe and look anxiously towards the farm of the Fair Star.
   As soon as the class opened I had noticed that Meaulnes had not come back after the dinner hour.
   The boy next him certainly could not have failed to notice it too.
   Too busy with exam work he has not yet said anything.
   But as soon as he looks up the news will spread at once, and someone, as usual, will certainly call out, in a loud voice, the first words of the sentence:
  
  
   'Sir!
   Meaulnes. . .'
  
  
   I know that Meaulnes has gone.
   To be more exact I suspect him of having run away.
   As soon as dinner was over he must have jumped over the low wall, taken his course through the fields, and crossed the stream on the old plank for the Fair Star.
   He must have asked for the mare to go to the station for Monsieur and Madame Charpentier.
   They are harnessing her this very moment.
  
  
   The Fair Star, on the other side of the stream, where the hill slopes down, is a large farm hidden from our view in the summer by the oaks and elms in its yard and also by quick-set hedges.
   It is situated in a little lane which joins the Station Road on one side and on the other an outlying district of the village.
   The big feudal building is surrounded by high walls, the buttresses of which stand in pools of manure.
   In the month of June it is buried in leafage, and from the school the rumbling of carts and the shouts of the cowherds alone can be heard at nightfall.
   But to-day, out of the window and between the stripped trees, I can see the tall grey wall of the farmyard, the entrance gate and then, through gaps in the hedge, a strip of road, white with frost, parallel to the stream and leading to the Station Road.
  
  
   Nothing moves yet in that clear wintry lansdcape.
   Nothing has yet changed.
  
  
   In the classroom M. Seurel has almost finished writing out the second problem.
   Generally he set down three.
   If he only set two to-day . . .
   He would go back to his desk and notice the absence of Meaulnes.
   He would send two boys to look for him in the village and they would find him before the mare was harnessed ...
  
  
   M. Seurel, once the second problem is on the board, drops his tired arm.
   Then, to my great relief, he goes to the next line and begins to write again, saying:
  
  'This one is only child's play!'
  
   . . .
   Two little black streaks showing over the top of the wall at the Fair Star, certainly the upturned shafts of a cart, have now disappeared.
   I feel sure that over there everything is being made ready for Meaulnes' departure.
   Soon the head and the fore parts of the mare emerge between the posts of the gateway, then stop, while, no doubt, behind the cart, they are fixing a second seat for the travellers whom Meaulnes proposes to fetch.
   At last the complete equipage slowly comes out of the yard, disappears for a moment behind the hedge, and, going at the same slow pace, shows itself again on the strip of white road visible between breaks in the fence.
   Then I recognise, in the black figure holding the reins, one elbow lazily resting on the side of the cart in peasant fashion, my friend, Augustin Meaulnes.
  
  
   A moment later everything disappears behind the hedge.
   Two men who have remained by the gate, looking at the departing cart, begin to converse with increasing liveliness.
   One of them at last decides to make a speaking-trumpet of his hands and to call after Meaulnes and then to run a few paces along the road in his direction.
   But then, in the cart, which slowly has reached the Station Road and can certainly no longer be seen from the lane, Meaulnes suddenly changes his attitude.
   Standing up like the driver of a Roman chariot, one foot resting on the front bar and both hands shaking the reins, he sets his beast going at a gallop and in a moment disappears on the other side of the slope.
   On the road the man who has been calling begins to run again, and the other, starting at full speed across the fields, seems to be coming towards us.
  
  In a few minutes, just as M. Seurel having left the blackboard is rubbing the chalk off his hands and at the very moment when three voices call out together from the back of the classroom:
  
   'Sir !
   Admiral Meaulnes has gone !' the man with the blue smock is at the door, which he suddenly throws wide open and lifting his hat asks from the doorstep :
  
  
   'Excuse me, sir, is it you as sent that pupil to ask for the cart to drive to Vierzon to meet your parents?
   We began to suspect. ..'
  
  'Certainly not!' replied M. Seurel.
  
   And at once all the class is in frightful disorder.
   The three boys close to the door, whose usual job is to chase away with stones the goats or the pigs which stray in the playground and browse the March Pride, rush out.
   Following the loud clatter of their hobnailed clogs on the flagstones of the room are heard their muffled and hurried steps crushing the sand of the yard and skidding as they sharply turn by the little gate opening on the road.
   The other boys have crowded to the garden windows.
   Some have climbed on the table to see better ...
  
  
   But it is too late.
   Admiral Meaulnes has escaped.
  
  
   'You will go to the station with Mouchebœuf all the same,' says M. Seurel to me.
   'Meaulnes does not know the way to Vierzon.
   He will lose himself at the Cross-Roads.
   He will not meet the train at three.'
  
  Millie pokes her head in at the door of the infants' classroom to ask:
  'What on earth is the matter?'
  
   In the village street people have begun to form groups.
   The peasant stands there, hat in hand, obstinate, motionless, like a man demanding justice.
  
  V
  THE CART COMES BACK
  When I had brought home my grandparents from the station and after dinner, seated in front of the large hearth, they began to relate in full detail all that had happened to them since the last holidays, I soon realised that I was not listening.
  
   The little gate of the playground was quite near the dining- room door.
   It used to squeak as it opened.
   Generally at nightfall, during the long country evenings, I sat secretly waiting for this squeaking of the gate.
   It was usually followed by the noise of clogs clattering or being wiped outside the door, and sometimes by whispers as of people making some plan before coming in.
   There was a knock.
   It was a neighbour, the women teachers... anyhow, some one who was coming to cheer us during these long hours.
  
  But that evening I had nothing to hope for from outside, since all those I loved were met together in our house; and yet I continued to be alert to all the noises of the night and to wait for some one to open our door.
  
   Old Grandfather was there, hairy and bushy in appearance like some big Gascon shepherd, his two feet firmly planted as he sat, his stick between his legs, and with the usual slant of his right shoulder when he stooped to tap the ashes from his pipe against his shoe.
   He was approving with his kind moist eyes what Grandmother was saying about their journey, their neighbours, and the peasants who had not yet paid their rent.
   But I was no longer with them.
  
  
   I was imagining the rumbling of a cart which would suddenly stop at our door.
   Meaulnes would jump from it and walk in as if nothing had happened ...
   Of perhaps he had first gone to take back the mare to the Fair Star, and I should soon hear his step sounding on the road, and the gate opening . . .
  
  
   But nothing happened.
   Grandfather was gazing fixedly in front of him and his winking eyelids kept closing over his eyes as at the approach of sleep.
   Grandmother awkwardly repeated her last sentence, which no one was listening to.
  
  'Is it about that boy that you are worried?' she said at last.
  
   As a matter of fact, I had questioned her at the station to no purpose.
   She had seen no one at Vierzon who might have been Admiral Meaulnes.
   My friend must have been delayed on the way.
   His attempt had failed.
   During our return journey I had brooded over my disappointment, while Grandmother was chatting with Mouchebœuf.
   On the road whitened with frost, small birds had been fluttering around the hoofs of the trotting donkey.
   From time to time above the stillness of the wintry afternoon had arisen the far-away call of a farm girl or of a lad hailing a comrade from one clump of firs to another, and each time that long call over the desolate hills had made me shudder as if it were the voice of Meaulnes inviting me to follow him from afar . . .
  
  
   While I was going over all this in my mind, bedtime came.
   Already Grandfather had gone into the red room, the bed- sitting-room so damp and icy cold from having been closed since last winter.
   To make him at home the lace antimacassars of the armchairs had been removed, the rugs folded up and all the knick-knacks put away.
   He had placed his stick on a chair, his thick shoes under an armchair, he had just put out his candle and we were standing saying good-night, ready to retire to bed, when the noise of a cart silenced us.
  
  
   It almost sounded as if two vehicles slowly followed each other at a very slow trot.
   The noise finally came to a stop under the dining-room window which overlooked the road, but was never used.
  
  
   Father had taken up the lamp and, without waiting, went to open the door which had already been locked.
   Then pushing open the gate, he walked to the edge of the steps and raised his light above his head to see what was happening.
  
  
   Two carts had in fact stopped, the horse of one fastened behind the back of the other.
   A man had jumped down and was hesitating ...
  
  
   'Is this the town hall?' said he, coming near.
   'Could you direct me to M. Fromentin, the farmer at the Fair Star?
   I have found his cart and mare without a driver, going along the lane, close to the road of
